Abstract

A good onboarding experience is more of an exception than the norm when it
comes to most software companies. This is a pattern that needs to change,
especially since we have an influx of new developers coming in the industry,
brimming with enthusiasm to learn. The reasons behind lack of effective
onboarding programs are numerous, most notable among which is that
organizations may not have the necessary bandwidth. Therefore, I want to share
strategies that will help developers joining a new team figure out how they can
take charge of their onboarding experience. In addition, I will share specific
ways these developers can continue to improve beyond their first three months
on the team along with resources aimed at achieving that goal.

The strategies discussed in the talk are borne out of my experience over the
past three years, both as someone who started with limited experience as well
as a person responsible to on-board a new member on the team. While the talk is
focussed on beginners, the strategies can be useful to people of all experience
levels when they are joining a new team or trying to familiarize themselves
with a new codebase. Furthermore, the talk will allow these experienced
developers to understand the challenges a new person joining the team enabling
them to improve the current onboarding process at their respective
organizations.

# Details

The talk describes an ideal progression for a new programmer joining a team and
frames it as a series of firsts: things that new members should focus on their
first day, first week, etc. It then dives into the process of working solo on
the first bug and the first feature. It highlights how working solo provides
beginners with a playground to test their knowledge while giving them the
opportunity to explore new areas of the application and the problem domain. It
goes on to cover some caveats and ways to minimize and/or avoid their negative
ramifications. It explores ways folks can continue their growth upon
successfully onboarding with the team. It ends with brief look at resources
that are pertinent to the topic and likens the onboarding process to how we
craft software the Agile Wayâ„¢: by embracing uncertainties and making progress
through small, deliberate steps.

As mentioned in the abstract, the intended audience are programmers who have
limited experience starting on a new team. However, I am confident that
experienced programmers will find these strategies useful as well. I have
successfully applied most of these strategies when I have switched teams after
having some experience under my belt. I have also used the concepts here to
help a new person joining our team get comfortable with the codebase and the
software development process.

# Pitch

I came to the Ruby community with a computer science background and four years
of desktop programming in VB6, VBA & .NET. Despite my previous experience, it
was *still* challenging to strike a balance between learning and delivering
value. In the past two years, I have experimented with different ways to get
familiar with a new team and the codebase. The progression I describe in the
talk, in many ways, is the kind of experience I wish I had when I was strating
out. I do not want the new programmers coming to our community to suffer
through the same challenges and figure all of this out on their own. By sharing
these strategies, I hope that they have the tools necessary to take the
responsibility of crafting their personal onboarding experience. Furthermore, I
want to show more experienced members of the community who are in a position to
create onboarding programs in their organizations what are some of the
components of an ideal onboarding experience. The talk will also help them
understand the challenges new developers face when they are just starting out.
Finally, I want to start a conversation around this issue because it is
something that is rarely discussed in our community. RailsConf will provide the
perfect platform to achieve that goal.

# Bio

[Ashish Dixit](https://twitter.com/tundal45) is a Software Developer at
[Groupon](http://engineering.groupon.com). He is currently on his third team
after starting as a beginner Ruby on Rails developer two and half years ago.
His current focus is to become a full-stack developer and a systems thinker.

As someone who is at the beginning of his [programming
journey](http://ofps.oreilly.com/titles/9780596518387/walking_the_long_road.html),
Ashish collaborates with talented individuals to build great internal tools.
While he is not coding and learning from awesome people around him, Ashish
dabbles in cooking, running, riding his bike and live tweeting any delays
involving trains, planes and automobiles.
